### Recommendations

Unique ID | Written Description | Category | Link |
--------- | ------------------- | ---------| ---- |
rec001|Treatment decisions should be timely, rely on evidence-based guidelines, and be made collaboratively with patients based on individual preferences, prognoses, and comorbidities. B|Promoting Health and Reducing Disparities in Populations|[rec001] ()
rec002|Providers should consider the burden of treatment and self-efficacy of patients when recommending treatments. E|Promoting Health and Reducing Disparities in Populations|[rec002] ()
rec003|Treatment plans should align with the Chronic Care Model, emphasizing productive interactions between a prepared proactive practice team and an informed activated patient. A|Promoting Health and Reducing Disparities in Populations|[rec003] ()
rec004|When feasible, care systems should support team-based care, community involvement, patient registries, and decision support tools to meet patient needs. B|Promoting Health and Reducing Disparities in Populations|[rec004] ()
rec005|Providers should assess social context, including potential food insecurity, housing stability, and financial barriers, and apply that information to treatment decisions. A|TAILORING TREATMENT TO REDUCE DISPARITIES|[rec005] (https://github.com/johnnybender/adastandards2017/blob/master/recommendations/rec005.md)
rec006|Patients should be referred to local community resources when available. B|TAILORING TREATMENT TO REDUCE DISPARITIES|[rec006] ()
rec007|Patients should be provided with self-management support from lay health coaches, navigators, or community health workers when available. A|TAILORING TREATMENT TO REDUCE DISPARITIES|[rec007] ()
rec008|Screening for prediabetes and risk for future diabetes with an informal assessment of risk factors or validated tools should be considered in asymptomatic adults. B|CATEGORIES OF INCREASED RISK FOR DIABETES (PREDIABETES)|[rec008] ()
rec009|Testing for prediabetes and risk for future diabetes in asymptomatic people should be considered in adults of any age who are overweight or obese (BMI ≥25 kg/m2 or ≥23 kg/m2 in Asian Americans) and who have one or more additional risk factors for diabetes. B|CATEGORIES OF INCREASED RISK FOR DIABETES (PREDIABETES)|[rec009] ()
rec010|For all people, testing should begin at age 45 years. B|CATEGORIES OF INCREASED RISK FOR DIABETES (PREDIABETES)|[rec0010] ()
rec011|If tests are normal, repeat testing carried out at a minimum of 3-year intervals is reasonable. C|CATEGORIES OF INCREASED RISK FOR DIABETES (PREDIABETES)|[rec011] ()
rec012|To test for prediabetes, fasting plasma glucose, 2-h plasma glucose after 75-g oral glucose tolerance test, and A1C are equally appropriate.B|CATEGORIES OF INCREASED RISK FOR DIABETES (PREDIABETES)|[rec012] ()
rec013|In patients with prediabetes, identify and, if appropriate, treat other cardiovascular disease risk factors. B|CATEGORIES OF INCREASED RISK FOR DIABETES (PREDIABETES)|[rec013] ()
rec014|Testing for prediabetes should be considered in children and adolescents who are overweight or obese and who have two or more additional risk factors for diabetes.E|CATEGORIES OF INCREASED RISK FOR DIABETES (PREDIABETES)|[rec014] ()
rec015|Blood glucose rather than A1C should be used to diagnose the acute onset of type 1 diabetes in individuals with symptoms of hyperglycemia. E|TYPE 1 DIABETES|[rec015] ()
rec016|Screening for type 1 diabetes with a panel of autoantibodies is currently recommended only in the setting of a research trial or in first-degree family members of a proband with type 1 diabetes. B|TYPE 1 DIABETES|[rec016] ()
rec017|Persistence of two or more autoantibodies predicts clinical diabetes and may serve as an indication for intervention in the setting of a clinical trial. Outcomes may include reversion of autoantibody status, prevention of glycemic progression within the normal or prediabetes range, prevention of clinical diabetes, or preservation of residual C-peptide secretion. A|TYPE 1 DIABETES|[rec017] ()
rec018|Screening for type 2 diabetes with an informal assessment of risk factors or validated tools should be considered in asymptomatic adults. B|TYPE 2 DIABETES|[rec018] ()
rec019|Testing for type 2 diabetes in asymptomatic people should be considered in adults of any age who are overweight or obese (BMI ≥25 kg/m2 or ≥23 kg/m2 in Asian Americans) and who have one or more additional risk factors for diabetes. B|TYPE 2 DIABETES|[rec019] ()
rec020|For all people, testing should begin at age 45 years. B|TYPE 2 DIABETES|[rec020] ()
rec021|If tests are normal, repeat testing carried out at a minimum of 3-year intervals is reasonable. C|TYPE 2 DIABETES|[rec021] ()
rec022|To test for type 2 diabetes, fasting plasma glucose, 2-h plasma glucose after 75-g oral glucose tolerance test, and A1C are equally appropriate. B|TYPE 2 DIABETES|[rec022] ()
rec023|In patients with diabetes, identify and treat other cardiovascular disease risk factors. B|TYPE 2 DIABETES|[rec023] ()
rec024|Testing for type 2 diabetes should be considered in children and adolescents who are overweight or obese and who have two or more additional risk factors for diabetes. E|TYPE 2 DIABETES|[rec024] ()
rec025|Test for undiagnosed diabetes at the first prenatal visit in those with risk factors, using standard diagnostic criteria. B|GESTATIONAL DIABETES MELLITUS|[rec025] ()
rec026|Test for gestational diabetes mellitus at 24–28 weeks of gestation in pregnant women not previously known to have diabetes. A|GESTATIONAL DIABETES MELLITUS|[rec026] ()
rec027|Test women with gestational diabetes mellitus for persistent diabetes at 4–12 weeks’ postpartum, using the oral glucose tolerance test and clinically appropriate nonpregnancy diagnostic criteria. E|GESTATIONAL DIABETES MELLITUS|[rec027] ()
rec028|Women with a history of gestational diabetes mellitus should have lifelong screening for the development of diabetes or prediabetes at least every 3 years. B|GESTATIONAL DIABETES MELLITUS|[rec028] ()
rec029|Women with a history of gestational diabetes mellitus found to have prediabetes should receive intensive lifestyle interventions or metformin to prevent diabetes. A|GESTATIONAL DIABETES MELLITUS|[rec029] ()
rec030|All children diagnosed with diabetes in the first 6 months of life should have immediate genetic testing for neonatal diabetes. A|MONOGENIC DIABETES SYNDROMES|[rec030] ()
rec031|Children and adults, diagnosed in early adulthood, who have diabetes not characteristic of type 1 or type 2 diabetes that occurs in successive generations (suggestive of an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance) should have genetic testing for maturity-onset diabetes of the young. A|MONOGENIC DIABETES SYNDROMES|[rec031] ()
rec032|In both instances, consultation with a center specializing in diabetes genetics is recommended to understand the significance of these mutations and how best to approach further evaluation, treatment, and genetic counseling. E|MONOGENIC DIABETES SYNDROMES|[rec032] ()
rec033|Annual screening for cystic fibrosis– related diabetes with oral glucose tolerance test should begin by age 10 years in all patients with cystic fibrosis not previously diagnosed with cystic fibrosis–related diabetes. B|CYSTIC FIBROSIS–RELATED DIABETES|[rec033] ()
rec034|A1C as a screening test for cystic fibrosis–related diabetes is not recommended. B|CYSTIC FIBROSIS–RELATED DIABETES|[rec034] ()
rec035|Patients with cystic fibrosis–related diabetes should be treated with insulin to attain individualized glycemic goals. A|CYSTIC FIBROSIS–RELATED DIABETES|[rec035] ()
rec036|Beginning 5 years after the diagnosis of cystic fibrosis–related diabetes, annual monitoring for complications of diabetes is recommended. E|CYSTIC FIBROSIS–RELATED DIABETES|[rec036] ()
rec037|Patients should be screened after organ transplantation for hyperglycemia, with a formal diagnosis of posttransplantation diabetes mellitus being best made once a patient is stable on an immunosuppressive regimen and in the absence of an acute infection. E|POSTTRANSPLANTATION DIABETES MELLITUS|[rec037] ()
rec038|The oral glucose tolerance test is the preferred test to make a diagnosis of posttransplantation diabetes mellitus. B|POSTTRANSPLANTATION DIABETES MELLITUS|[rec038] ()
rec039|Immunosuppressive regimens shown to provide the best outcomes for patient and graft survival should be used, irrespective of posttransplantation diabetes mellitus risk. E|POSTTRANSPLANTATION DIABETES MELLITUS|[rec039] ()
rec040|A patient-centered communication style that uses active listening, elicits patient preferences and beliefs, and assesses literacy, numeracy, and potential barriers to care should be used to optimize patient health outcomes and health-related quality of life. B|PATIENT-CENTERED COLLABORATIVE CARE|[rec040] ()
rec041|Confirm the diagnosis and classify diabetes. B|COMPREHENSIVE MEDICAL EVALUATION|[rec041] ()
rec042|Detect diabetes complications and potential comorbid conditions. E|COMPREHENSIVE MEDICAL EVALUATION|[rec042] ()
rec043|Review previous treatment and risk factor control in patients with established diabetes. E|COMPREHENSIVE MEDICAL EVALUATION|[rec043] ()
rec044|Begin patient engagement in the formulation of a care management plan. B|COMPREHENSIVE MEDICAL EVALUATION|[rec044] ()
rec045|Develop a plan for continuing care. B|COMPREHENSIVE MEDICAL EVALUATION|[rec045] ()
rec046|Provide routine vaccinations for children and adults with diabetes according to age-related recommendations.C|Immunization|[rec046] ()
rec047|Annual vaccination against influenza is recommended for all persons with diabetes ≥6 months of age. C|Immunization|[rec047] ()
rec048|Vaccination against pneumonia is recommended for all people with diabetes 2 through 64 years of age with pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23). At age ≥65 years, administer the pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13) at least 1 year after vaccination with PPSV23, followed by another dose of vaccine PPSV23 at least 1 year after PCV13 and at least 5 years after the last dose of PPSV23. C|Immunization|[rec048] ()
rec049|Administer 3-dose series of hepatitis B vaccine to unvaccinated adults with diabetes who are age 19–59 years. C|Immunization|[rec049] ()
rec050|Consider administering 3-dose series of hepatitis B vaccine to unvaccinated adults with diabetes who are age ≥60 years. C|Immunization|[rec050] ()
rec051|Consider screening patients with type 1 diabetes for autoimmune thyroid disease and celiac disease soon after diagnosis. E|Autoimmune Diseases|[rec051] ()
rec052|In people with cognitive impairment/dementia, intensive glucose control cannot be expected to remediate deficits. Treatment should be tailored to avoid significant hypoglycemia. B|Cognitive Impairment/Dementia|[rec052] ()
rec053|Patients with HIV should be screened for diabetes and prediabetes with a fasting glucose level every 6–12 months before starting antiretroviral therapy and 3 months after starting or changing antiretroviral therapy. If initial screening results are normal, checking fasting glucose every year is advised. If prediabetes is detected, continue to measure fasting glucose levels every 3–6 months to monitor for progression to diabetes. E|HIV|[rec053] ()
rec054|Consider screening for anxiety in people exhibiting anxiety or worries regarding diabetes complications, insulin injections or infusion, taking medications, and/or hypoglycemia that interfere with self-management behaviors and those who express fear, dread, or irrational thoughts and/or show anxiety symptoms such as avoidance behaviors, excessive repetitive behaviors, or social withdrawal. Refer for treatment if anxiety is present. B|Anxiety Disorders|[rec054] ()
rec055|Persons with hypoglycemic unawareness, which can co-occur with fear of hypoglycemia, should be treated using blood glucose awareness training (or other evidence-based similar intervention) to help re-establish awareness of hypoglycemia and reduce fear of hyperglycemia. A|Anxiety Disorders|[rec055] ()
rec056|Providers should consider annual screening of all patients with diabetes, especially those with a selfreported history of depression, for depressive symptoms with ageappropriate depression screening measures, recognizing that further evaluation will be necessary for individuals who have a positive screen. B|Depression|[rec056] ()
rec057|Beginning at diagnosis of complications or when there are significant changes in medical status, consider assessment for depression. B|Depression|[rec057] ()
rec058|Referrals for treatment of depression should be made to mental health providers with experience using cognitive behavioral therapy, interpersonal therapy, or other evidence-based treatment approaches in conjunction with collaborative care with the patient’s diabetes treatment team. A|Depression|[rec058] ()
rec059|Providers should consider reevaluating the treatment regimen of people with diabetes who present with symptoms of disordered eating behavior, an eating disorder, or disrupted patterns of eating. B|Disordered Eating Behavior|[rec059] ()
rec060|Consider screening for disordered or disrupted eating using validated screening measures when hyperglycemia and weight loss are unexplained based on self-reported behaviors related to medication dosing, meal plan, and physical activity. In addition, a review of the medical regimen is recommended to identify potential treatment-related effects on hunger/caloric intake. B|Disordered Eating Behavior|[rec060] ()
rec061|Annually screen people who are prescribed atypical antipsychotic medications for prediabetes or diabetes. B|Serious Mental Illness|[rec061] ()
rec062|If a second-generation antipsychotic medication is prescribed for adolescents or adults with diabetes, changes in weight, glycemic control, and cholesterol levels should be carefully monitored and the treatment regimen should be reassessed. C|Serious Mental Illness|[rec062] ()
rec063|Incorporate monitoring of diabetes self-care activities into treatment goals in people with diabetes and serious mental illness. B|Serious Mental Illness|[rec063] ()
rec064|In accordance with the national standards for diabetes self-management education and support, all people with diabetes should participate in diabetes self-management education to facilitate the knowledge, skills, and ability necessary for diabetes self-care and in diabetes self-management support to assist with implementing and sustaining skills and behaviors needed for ongoing self-management, both at diagnosis and as needed thereafter. B|DIABETES SELF-MANAGEMENT EDUCATION AND SUPPORT|[rec064] ()
rec065|Effective self-management and improved clinical outcomes, health status, and quality of life are key goals of diabetes self-management education and support that should be measured and monitored as part of routine care. C|DIABETES SELF-MANAGEMENT EDUCATION AND SUPPORT|[rec065] ()
rec066|Diabetes self-management education and support should be patient centered, respectful, and responsive to individual patient preferences, needs, and values and should help guide clinical decisions. A|DIABETES SELF-MANAGEMENT EDUCATION AND SUPPORT|[rec066] ()
rec067|Diabetes self-management education and support programs have the necessary elements in their curricula to delay or prevent the development of type 2 diabetes. Diabetes self-management education and support programs should therefore be able to tailor their content when prevention of diabetes is the desired goal. B|DIABETES SELF-MANAGEMENT EDUCATION AND SUPPORT|[rec067] ()
rec068|Because diabetes self-management education and support can improve outcomes and reduce costs B, diabetes self-management education and support should be adequately reimbursed by third-party payers. E|DIABETES SELF-MANAGEMENT EDUCATION AND SUPPORT|[rec068] ()
rec069|Children and adolescents with type 1 or type 2 diabetes or prediabetes should engage in 60 min/day or more of moderate- or vigorousintensity aerobic activity, with vigorous muscle-strengthening and bone-strengthening activities at least 3 days/week. C|PHYSICAL ACTIVITY|[rec069] ()
rec070|Most adults with with type 1 C and type 2 B diabetes should engage in 150 min or more of moderate-to-vigorous intensity physical activity per week, spread over at least 3 days/week, with no more than 2 consecutive days without activity. Shorter durations (minimum 75 min/week) of vigorous-intensity or interval training may be suffi-cient for younger and more physically fit individuals.|PHYSICAL ACTIVITY|[rec070] ()
rec071|Adults with type 1 C and type 2 B diabetes should engage in 2–3 sessions/week of resistance exercise on nonconsecutive days.|PHYSICAL ACTIVITY|[rec071] ()
rec072|All adults, and particularly those with type 2 diabetes, should decrease the amount of time spent in daily sedentary behavior. B Prolonged sitting should be interrupted every 30 min for blood glucose benefits, particularly in adults with type 2 diabetes. C|PHYSICAL ACTIVITY|[rec072] ()
rec073|Flexibility training and balance training are recommended 2–3 times/week for older adults with diabetes. Yoga and tai chi may be included based on individual preferences to increase flexibility, muscular strength, and balance. C|PHYSICAL ACTIVITY|[rec073] ()
rec074|Advise all patients not to use cigarettes and other tobacco products A or e-cigarettes. E|SMOKING CESSATION: TOBACCO AND e-CIGARETTES|[rec074] ()
rec075|Include smoking cessation counseling and other forms of treatment as a routine component of diabetes care. B|SMOKING CESSATION: TOBACCO AND e-CIGARETTES|[rec075] ()
rec076|Psychosocial care should be integrated with a collaborative, patient-centered approach and provided to all people with diabetes, with the goals of optimizing health outcomes and health-related quality of life. A|PSYCHOSOCIAL ISSUES|[rec076] ()
rec077|Psychosocial screening and followup may include, but are not limited to, attitudes about the illness, expectations for medical management and outcomes, affect or mood, general and diabetes-related quality of life, available resources (fi-nancial, social, and emotional), and psychiatric history. E|PSYCHOSOCIAL ISSUES|[rec077] ()
rec078|Providers should consider assessment for symptoms of diabetes distress, depression, anxiety, disordered eating, and cognitive capacities using patient-appropriate standardized and validated tools at the initial visit, at periodic intervals, and when there is a change in disease, treatment, or life circumstance. Including caregivers and family members in this assessment is recommended. B|PSYCHOSOCIAL ISSUES|[rec078] ()
rec079|Consider screening older adults (aged ≥65 years) with diabetes for cognitive impairment and depression. B|PSYCHOSOCIAL ISSUES|[rec079] ()
rec080|Routinely monitor people with diabetes for diabetes distress, particularly when treatment targets are not met and/or at the onset of diabetes complications. B|Diabetes Distress|[rec080] ()
rec081|At least annual monitoring for the development of diabetes in those with prediabetes is suggested. E|Prevention or Delay of Type 2 Diabetes|[rec081] ()
rec082|Patients with prediabetes should be referred to an intensive behavioral lifestyle intervention program modeled on the Diabetes Prevention Program to achieve and maintain 7% loss of initial body weight and increase moderateintensity physical activity (such as brisk walking) to at least 150 min/week. A|Prevention or Delay of Type 2 Diabetes|[rec082] ()
rec083|Technology-assisted tools including Internet-based social networks, distance learning, DVD-based content, and mobile applications may be useful elements of effective lifestyle modification to prevent diabetes. B|Prevention or Delay of Type 2 Diabetes|[rec083] ()
rec084|Given the cost-effectiveness of diabetes prevention, such intervention programs should be covered by third-party payers. B|Prevention or Delay of Type 2 Diabetes|[rec084] ()
rec085|Metformin therapy for prevention of type 2 diabetes should be considered in those with prediabetes, especially for those with BMI ≥35 kg/m2, those aged <60 years, women with prior gestational diabetes mellitus, and/or those with rising A1C despite lifestyle intervention. A|PHARMACOLOGIC INTERVENTIONS|[rec085] ()
rec086|Long-term use of metformin may be associated with biochemical vitamin B12 deficiency, and periodic measurement of vitamin B12 levels should be considered in metformin-treated patients, especially in those with anemia or peripheral neuropathy. B|PHARMACOLOGIC INTERVENTIONS|[rec086] ()
rec087|Screening for and treatment of modifiable risk factors for cardiovascular disease is suggested for those with prediabetes. B|PREVENTION OF CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE|[rec087] ()
rec088|Diabetes self-management education and support programs may be appropriate venues for people with prediabetes to receive education and support to develop and maintain behaviors that can prevent or delay the development of diabetes. B|DIABETES SELF-MANAGEMENT EDUCATION AND SUPPORT|[rec088] ()
rec089|Most patients using intensive insulin regimens (multiple-dose insulin or insulin pump therapy) should perform self-monitoring of blood glucose (SMBG) prior to meals and snacks, at bedtime, occasionally postprandially, prior to exercise, when they suspect low blood glucose, after treating low blood glucose until they are normoglycemic, and prior to critical tasks such as driving. B|ASSESSMENT OF GLYCEMIC CONTROL|[rec089] ()
rec090|When prescribed as part of a broad educational program, SMBG may help to guide treatment decisions and/or self-management for patients taking less frequent insulin injections B or noninsulin therapies. E|ASSESSMENT OF GLYCEMIC CONTROL|[rec090] ()
rec091|When prescribing SMBG, ensure that patients receive ongoing instruction and regular evaluation of SMBG technique, SMBG results, and their ability to use SMBG data to adjust therapy. E|ASSESSMENT OF GLYCEMIC CONTROL|[rec091] ()
rec092|When used properly, continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) in conjunction with intensive insulin regimens is a useful tool to lower A1C in selected adults (aged ≥25 years) with type 1 diabetes. A|ASSESSMENT OF GLYCEMIC CONTROL|[rec092] ()
rec093|Although the evidence for A1C lowering is less strong in children, teens, and younger adults, CGM may be helpful in these groups. Success correlates with adherence to ongoing use of the device. B|ASSESSMENT OF GLYCEMIC CONTROL|[rec093] ()
rec094|CGM may be a useful tool in those with hypoglycemia unawareness and/or frequent hypoglycemic episodes. C|ASSESSMENT OF GLYCEMIC CONTROL|[rec094] ()
rec095|Given the variable adherence to CGM, assess individual readiness for continuing CGM use prior to prescribing. E|ASSESSMENT OF GLYCEMIC CONTROL|[rec095] ()
rec096|When prescribing CGM, robust diabetes education, training, and support are required for optimal CGM implementation and ongoing use. E|ASSESSMENT OF GLYCEMIC CONTROL|[rec096] ()
rec097|People who have been successfully using CGM should have continued access after they turn 65 years of age. E|ASSESSMENT OF GLYCEMIC CONTROL|[rec097] ()
rec098|Perform the A1C test at least two times a year in patients who are meeting treatment goals (and who have stable glycemic control). E|A1C TESTING|[rec098] ()
rec099|Perform the A1C test quarterly in patients whose therapy has changed or who are not meeting glycemic goals. E|A1C TESTING|[rec099] ()
rec100|Point-of-care testing for A1C provides the opportunity for more timely treatment changes. E|A1C TESTING|[rec100] ()
rec101|A reasonable A1C goal for many nonpregnant adults is <7% (53 mmol/mol). A|A1C GOALS|[rec101] ()
rec102|Providers might reasonably suggest more stringent A1C goals (such as <6.5% [48 mmol/mol]) for selected individual patients if this can be achieved without significant hypoglycemia or other adverse effects of treatment (i.e., polypharmacy). Appropriate patients might include those with short duration of diabetes, type 2 diabetes treated with lifestyle or metformin only, long life expectancy, or no significant cardiovascular disease. C|A1C GOALS|[rec102] ()
rec103|Less stringent A1C goals (such as <8% [64 mmol/mol]) may be appropriate for patients with a history of severe hypoglycemia, limited life expectancy, advanced microvascular or macrovascular complications, extensive comorbid conditions, or long-standing diabetes in whom the goal is diffi-cult to achieve despite diabetes self-management education, appropriate glucose monitoring, and effective doses of multiple glucose-lowering agents including insulin. B|A1C GOALS|[rec103] ()
rec104|Individuals at risk for hypoglycemia should be asked about symptomatic and asymptomatic hypoglycemia at each encounter. C|HYPOGLYCEMIA|[rec104] ()
rec105|Glucose (15–20 g) is the preferred treatment for the conscious individual with hypoglycemia (glucose alert value of ≤70 mg/dL [3.9 mmol/L]), although any form of carbohydrate that contains glucose may be used. Fifteen minutes after treatment, if SMBG shows continued hypoglycemia, the treatment should be repeated. Once SMBG returns to normal, the individual should consume a meal or snack to prevent recurrence of hypoglycemia. E|HYPOGLYCEMIA|[rec105] ()
rec106|Glucagon should be prescribed for all individuals at increased risk of clinically significant hypoglycemia, de-fined as blood glucose <54 mg/dL (3.0 mmol/L), so it is available should it be needed. Caregivers, school personnel, or family members of these individuals should know where it is and when and how to administer it. Glucagon administration is not limited to health care professionals. E|HYPOGLYCEMIA|[rec106] ()
rec107|Hypoglycemia unawareness or one or more episodes of severe hypoglycemia should trigger reevaluation of the treatment regimen. E|HYPOGLYCEMIA|[rec107] ()
rec108|Insulin-treated patients with hypoglycemia unawareness or an episode of clinically significant hypoglycemia should be advised to raise their glycemic targets to strictly avoid hypoglycemia for at least several weeks in order to partially reverse hypoglycemia unawareness and reduce risk of future episodes. A|HYPOGLYCEMIA|[rec108] ()
rec109|Ongoing assessment of cognitive function is suggested with increased vigilance for hypoglycemia by the clinician, patient, and caregivers if low cognition or declining cognition is found. B|HYPOGLYCEMIA|[rec109] ()
rec110|At each patient encounter, BMI should be calculated and documented in the medical record. B|ASSESSMENT|[rec110] ()
rec111|Diet, physical activity, and behavioral therapy designed to achieve >5% weight loss should be prescribed for overweight and obese patients with type 2 diabetes ready to achieve weight loss. A|DIET, PHYSICAL ACTIVITY, AND BEHAVIORAL THERAPY|[rec111] ()
rec112|Such interventions should be high intensity (≥16 sessions in 6 months) and focus on diet, physical activity, and behavioral strategies to achieve a 500–750 kcal/day energy deficit. A|DIET, PHYSICAL ACTIVITY, AND BEHAVIORAL THERAPY|[rec112] ()
rec113|Diets should be individualized, as those that provide the same caloric restriction but differ in protein, carbohydrate, and fat content are equally effective in achieving weight loss. A|DIET, PHYSICAL ACTIVITY, AND BEHAVIORAL THERAPY|[rec113] ()
rec114|For patients who achieve short-term weight loss goals, long-term (≥1-year) comprehensive weight maintenance programs should be prescribed. Such programs should provide at least monthly contact and encourage ongoing monitoring of body weight (weekly or more frequently), continued consumption of a reduced calorie diet, and participation in high levels of physical activity (200–300 min/week). A|DIET, PHYSICAL ACTIVITY, AND BEHAVIORAL THERAPY|[rec114] ()
rec115|To achieve weight loss of >5%, short-term (3-month) interventions that use very low-calorie diets (≤800 kcal/day) and total meal replacements may be prescribed for carefully selected patients by trained practitioners in medical care settings with close medical monitoring. To maintain weight loss, such programs must incorporate long-term comprehensive weight maintenance counseling. B|DIET, PHYSICAL ACTIVITY, AND BEHAVIORAL THERAPY|[rec115] ()
rec116|When choosing glucose-lowering medications for overweight or obese patients with type 2 diabetes, consider their effect on weight. E|PHARMACOTHERAPY|[rec116] ()
rec117|Whenever possible, minimize the medications for comorbid conditions that are associated with weight gain. E|PHARMACOTHERAPY|[rec117] ()
rec118|Weight loss medications may be effective as adjuncts to diet, physical activity, and behavioral counseling for selected patients with type 2 diabetes and BMI ≥27 kg/m2. Potential benefits must be weighed against the potential risks of the medications. A|PHARMACOTHERAPY|[rec118] ()
rec119|If a patient’s response to weight loss medications is <5% weight loss after 3 months or if there are any safety or tolerability issues at any time, the medication should be discontinued and alternative medications or treatment approaches should be considered. A|PHARMACOTHERAPY|[rec119] ()
rec120|Metabolic surgery should be recommended to treat type 2 diabetes in appropriate surgical candidates with BMI ≥40 kg/m2 (BMI ≥37.5 kg/m2 in Asian Americans), regardless of the level of glycemic control or complexity of glucose-lowering regimens, and in adults with BMI 35.0–39.9 kg/m2 (32.5–37.4 kg/m2 in Asian Americans) when hyperglycemia is inadequately controlled despite lifestyle and optimal medical therapy. A|METABOLIC SURGERY|[rec120] ()
rec121|Metabolic surgery should be considered for adults with type 2 diabetes and BMI 30.0–34.9 kg/m2 (27.5–32.4 kg/m2 in Asian Americans) if hyperglycemia is inadequately controlled despite optimal medical control by either oral or injectable medications (including insulin). B|METABOLIC SURGERY|[rec121] ()
rec122|Metabolic surgery should be performed in high-volume centers with multidisciplinary teams that understand and are experienced in the management of diabetes and gastrointestinal surgery. C|METABOLIC SURGERY|[rec122] ()
rec123|Long-term lifestyle support and routine monitoring of micronutrient and nutritional status must be provided to patients after surgery, according to guidelines for postoperative management of metabolic surgery by national and international professional societies. C|METABOLIC SURGERY|[rec123] ()
rec124|People presenting for metabolic surgery should receive a comprehensive mental health assessment. B Surgery should be postponed in patients with histories of alcohol or substance abuse, significant depression, suicidal ideation, or other mental health conditions until these conditions have been fully addressed. E|METABOLIC SURGERY|[rec124] ()
rec125|People who undergo metabolic surgery should be evaluated to assess the need for ongoing mental health services to help them adjust to medical and psychosocial changes after surgery. C|METABOLIC SURGERY|[rec125] ()
rec126|Most people with type 1 diabetes should be treated with multiple daily injections of prandial insulin and basal insulin or continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion. A|PHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY FOR TYPE 1 DIABETES|[rec126] ()
rec127|Most individuals with type 1 diabetes should use rapid-acting insulin analogs to reduce hypoglycemia risk. A|PHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY FOR TYPE 1 DIABETES|[rec127] ()
rec128|Consider educating individuals with type 1 diabetes on matching prandial insulin doses to carbohydrate intake, premeal blood glucose levels, and anticipated physical activity. E|PHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY FOR TYPE 1 DIABETES|[rec128] ()
rec129|Individuals with type 1 diabetes who have been successfully using continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion should have continued access to this therapy after they turn 65 years of age. E|PHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY FOR TYPE 1 DIABETES|[rec129] ()
rec130|Metformin, if not contraindicated and if tolerated, is the preferred initial pharmacologic agent for the treatment of type 2 diabetes. A|PHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY FOR TYPE 2 DIABETES|[rec130] ()
rec131|Long-term use of metformin may be associated with biochemical vitamin B12 deficiency, and periodic measurement of vitamin B12 levels should be considered in metformin-treated patients, especially in those with anemia or peripheral neuropathy. B|PHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY FOR TYPE 2 DIABETES|[rec131] ()
rec132|Consider initiating insulin therapy (with or without additional agents) in patients with newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes who are symptomatic and/or have A1C ≥10% (86 mmol/mol) and/or blood glucose levels ≥300 mg/dL (16.7 mmol/L). E|PHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY FOR TYPE 2 DIABETES|[rec132] ()
rec133|If noninsulin monotherapy at maximum tolerated dose does not achieve or maintain the A1C target after 3 months, add a second oral agent, a glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist, or basal insulin. A|PHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY FOR TYPE 2 DIABETES|[rec133] ()
rec134|A patient-centered approach should be used to guide the choice of pharmacologic agents. Considerations include efficacy, hypoglycemia risk, impact on weight, potential side effects, cost, and patient preferences. E|PHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY FOR TYPE 2 DIABETES|[rec134] ()
rec135|For patients with type 2 diabetes who are not achieving glycemic goals, insulin therapy should not be delayed. B|PHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY FOR TYPE 2 DIABETES|[rec135] ()
rec136|In patients with long-standing suboptimally controlled type 2 diabetes and established atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, empagliflozin or liraglutide should be considered as they have been shown to reduce cardiovascular and all-cause mortality when added to standard care. Ongoing studies are investigating the cardiovascular benefits of other agents in these drug classes. B|PHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY FOR TYPE 2 DIABETES|[rec136] ()
rec137|Blood pressure should be measured at every routine visit. Patients found to have elevated blood pressure should have blood pressure confirmed on a separate day. B|HYPERTENSION/BLOOD PRESSURE CONTROL|[rec137] ()
rec138|Most patients with diabetes and hypertension should be treated to a systolic blood pressure goal of <140 mmHg and a diastolic blood pressure goal of <90 mmHg. A|HYPERTENSION/BLOOD PRESSURE CONTROL|[rec138] ()
rec139|Lower systolic and diastolic blood pressure targets, such as 130/80 mmHg, may be appropriate for individuals at high risk of cardiovascular disease, if they can be achieved without undue treatment burden. C|HYPERTENSION/BLOOD PRESSURE CONTROL|[rec139] ()
rec140|In pregnant patients with diabetes and chronic hypertension, blood pressure targets of 120–160/80–105 mmHg are suggested in the interest of optimizing long-term maternal health and minimizing impaired fetal growth. E|HYPERTENSION/BLOOD PRESSURE CONTROL|[rec140] ()
rec141|Patients with confirmed office-based blood pressure >140/90 mmHg should, in addition to lifestyle therapy, have prompt initiation and timely titration of pharmacologic therapy to achieve blood pressure goals. A|HYPERTENSION/BLOOD PRESSURE CONTROL|[rec141] ()
rec142|Patients with confirmed office-based blood pressure >160/100 mmHg should, in addition to lifestyle therapy, have prompt initiation and timely titration of two drugs or a single pill combination of drugs demonstrated to reduce cardiovascular events in patients with diabetes. A|HYPERTENSION/BLOOD PRESSURE CONTROL|[rec142] ()
rec143|Treatment for hypertension should include drug classes demonstrated to reduce cardiovascular events in patients with diabetes (ACE inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, thiazide-like diuretics, or dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers). Multiple drug therapy is generally required to achieve blood pressure targets (but not a combination of ACE inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers). A|HYPERTENSION/BLOOD PRESSURE CONTROL|[rec143] ()
rec144|An ACE inhibitor or angiotensin receptor blocker, at the maximum tolerated dose indicated for blood pressure treatment, is the recommended first-line treatment for hypertension in patients with diabetes and urinary albumin–to–creatinine ratio ≥300 mg/g creatinine (A) or 30–299 mg/g creatinine (B). If one class is not tolerated, the other should be substituted. B|HYPERTENSION/BLOOD PRESSURE CONTROL|[rec144] ()
rec145|For patients treated with an ACE inhibitor, angiotensin receptor blocker, or diuretic, serum creatinine/estimated glomerular filtration rate and serum potassium levels should be monitored. B|HYPERTENSION/BLOOD PRESSURE CONTROL|[rec145] ()
rec146|For patients with blood pressure >120/80 mmHg, lifestyle intervention consists of weight loss if overweight or obese; a Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension–style dietary pattern including reducing sodium and increasing potassium intake; moderation of alcohol intake; and increased physical activity. B|HYPERTENSION/BLOOD PRESSURE CONTROL|[rec146] ()
rec147|In adults not taking statins, it is reasonable to obtain a lipid profile at the time of diabetes diagnosis, at an initial medical evaluation, and every 5 years thereafter, or more frequently if indicated. E|LIPID MANAGEMENT|[rec147] ()
rec148|Obtain a lipid profile at initiation of statin therapy and periodically thereafter as it may help to monitor the response to therapy and inform adherence. E|LIPID MANAGEMENT|[rec148] ()
rec149|Lifestyle modification focusing on weight loss (if indicated); the reduction of saturated fat, trans fat, and cholesterol intake; increase of dietary ω-3 fatty acids, viscous fiber, and plant stanols/sterols intake; and increased physical activity should be recommended to improve the lipid profile in patients with diabetes. A|LIPID MANAGEMENT|[rec149] ()
rec150|Intensify lifestyle therapy and optimize glycemic control for patients with elevated triglyceride levels (≥150 mg/dL [1.7 mmol/L]) and/or low HDL cholesterol (<40 mg/dL [1.0 mmol/L] for men, <50 mg/dL [1.3 mmol/L] for women). C|LIPID MANAGEMENT|[rec150] ()
rec151|For patients with fasting triglyceride levels ≥500 mg/dL (5.7 mmol/L), evaluate for secondary causes of hypertriglyceridemia and consider medical therapy to reduce the risk of pancreatitis. C|LIPID MANAGEMENT|[rec151] ()
rec152|For patients of all ages with diabetes and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, high-intensity statin therapy should be added to lifestyle therapy. A|LIPID MANAGEMENT|[rec152] ()
rec153|For patients with diabetes aged <40 years with additional atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease risk factors, consider using moderateintensity or high-intensity statin and lifestyle therapy. C|LIPID MANAGEMENT|[rec153] ()
rec154|For patients with diabetes aged 40–75 years without additional atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease risk factors, consider using moderate-intensity statin and lifestyle therapy. A|LIPID MANAGEMENT|[rec154] ()
rec155|For patients with diabetes aged 40–75 years with additional atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease risk factors, consider using high-intensity statin and lifestyle therapy. B|LIPID MANAGEMENT|[rec155] ()
rec156|For patients with diabetes aged >75 years without additional atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease risk factors, consider using moderate-intensity statin therapy and lifestyle therapy. B|LIPID MANAGEMENT|[rec156] ()
rec157|For patients with diabetes aged >75 years with additional atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease risk factors, consider using moderateintensity or high-intensity statin therapy and lifestyle therapy. B|LIPID MANAGEMENT|[rec157] ()
rec158|In clinical practice, providers may need to adjust intensity of statin therapy based on individual patient response to medication (e.g., side effects, tolerability, LDL cholesterol levels). E|LIPID MANAGEMENT|[rec158] ()
rec159|The addition of ezetimibe to moderate-intensity statin therapy has been shown to provide additional cardiovascular benefit compared with moderate-intensity statin therapy alone for patients with recent acute coronary syndrome and LDL cholesterol ≥50 mg/dL (1.3 mmol/L) and should be considered for these patients A and also in patients with diabetes and history of ASCVD who cannot tolerate high-intensity statin therapy. E|LIPID MANAGEMENT|[rec159] ()
rec160|Combination therapy (statin/fibrate) has not been shown to improve atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease outcomes and is generally not recommended. A However, therapy with statin and fenofibrate may be considered for men with both triglyceride level ≥204 mg/dL (2.3 mmol/L) and HDL cholesterol level ≤34 mg/dL (0.9 mmol/L). B|LIPID MANAGEMENT|[rec160] ()
rec161|Combination therapy (statin/niacin) has not been shown to provide additional cardiovascular benefit above statin therapy alone and may increase the risk of stroke and is not generally recommended. A|LIPID MANAGEMENT|[rec161] ()
rec162|Statin therapy is contraindicated in pregnancy. B|LIPID MANAGEMENT|[rec162] ()
rec163|Use aspirin therapy (75–162 mg/day) as a secondary prevention strategy in those with diabetes and a history of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. A|ANTIPLATELET AGENTS|[rec163] ()
rec164|For patients with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease and documented aspirin allergy, clopidogrel (75 mg/day) should be used. B|ANTIPLATELET AGENTS|[rec164] ()
rec165|Dual antiplatelet therapy is reasonable for up to a year after an acute coronary syndrome and may have benefits beyond this period. B|ANTIPLATELET AGENTS|[rec165] ()
rec166|Consider aspirin therapy (75–162 mg/day) as a primary prevention strategy in those with type 1 or type 2 diabetes who are at increased cardiovascular risk. This includes most men and women with diabetes aged ≥50 years who have at least one additional major risk factor (family history of premature atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, hypertension, dyslipidemia, smoking, or albuminuria) and are not at increased risk of bleeding. C|ANTIPLATELET AGENTS|[rec166] ()
rec167|Aspirin should not be recommended for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease prevention for adults with diabetes at low atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease risk, such as in men or women with diabetes aged <50 years with no other major atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease risk factors, as the potential adverse effects from bleeding likely offset the potential benefits. C|ANTIPLATELET AGENTS|[rec167] ()
rec168|When considering aspirin therapy in patients with diabetes <50 years of age with multiple other atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease risk factors, clinical judgment is required. E|ANTIPLATELET AGENTS|[rec168] ()
rec169|In asymptomatic patients, routine screening for coronary artery disease is not recommended as it does not improve outcomes as long as atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease risk factors are treated. A|CORONARY HEART DISEASE|[rec169] ()
rec170|Consider investigations for coronary artery disease in the presence of any of the following: atypical cardiac symptoms (e.g., unexplained dyspnea, chest discomfort); signs or symptoms of associated vascular disease including carotid bruits, transient ischemic attack, stroke, claudication, or peripheral arterial disease; or electrocardiogram abnormalities (e.g., Q waves). E|CORONARY HEART DISEASE|[rec170] ()
rec171|In patients with known atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, use aspirin and statin therapy (if not contraindicated) A and consider ACE inhibitor therapy C to reduce the risk of cardiovascular events.|CORONARY HEART DISEASE|[rec171] ()
rec172|In patients with prior myocardial infarction, β-blockers should be continued for at least 2 years after the event. B|CORONARY HEART DISEASE|[rec172] ()
rec173|In patients with symptomatic heart failure, thiazolidinedione treatment should not be used. A|CORONARY HEART DISEASE|[rec173] ()
rec174|In patients with type 2 diabetes with stable congestive heart failure, metformin may be used if estimated glomerular filtration remains >30 mL/min but should be avoided in unstable or hospitalized patients with congestive heart failure. B|CORONARY HEART DISEASE|[rec174] ()
rec175|At least once a year, assess urinary albumin (e.g., spot urinary albumin–to–creatinine ratio) and estimated glomerular filtration rate in patients with type 1 diabetes with duration of ≥5 years, in all patients with type 2 diabetes, and in all patients with comorbid hypertension. B|DIABETIC KIDNEY DISEASE|[rec175] ()
rec176|Optimize glucose control to reduce the risk or slow the progression of diabetic kidney disease. A|DIABETIC KIDNEY DISEASE|[rec176] ()
rec177|Optimize blood pressure control to reduce the risk or slow the progression of diabetic kidney disease. A|DIABETIC KIDNEY DISEASE|[rec177] ()
rec178|For people with nondialysis-dependent diabetic kidney disease, dietary protein intake should be approximately 0.8 g/kg body weight per day (the recommended daily allowance). For patients on dialysis, higher levels of dietary protein intake should be considered. B|DIABETIC KIDNEY DISEASE|[rec178] ()
rec179|In nonpregnant patients with diabetes and hypertension, either an ACE inhibitor or an angiotensin receptor blocker is recommended for those with modestly elevated urinary albumin–to–creatinine ratio (30–299 mg/g creatinine) B and is strongly recommended for those with urinary albumin–to–creatinine ratio ≥300 mg/g creatinine and/or estimated glomerular filtration rate <60 mL/min/1.73 m2. A|DIABETIC KIDNEY DISEASE|[rec179] ()
rec180|Periodically monitor serum creatinine and potassium levels for the development of increased creatinine or changes in potassium when ACE inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, or diuretics are used. E|DIABETIC KIDNEY DISEASE|[rec180] ()
rec181|Continued monitoring of urinary albumin–to–creatinine ratio in patients with albuminuria treated with an ACE inhibitor or an angiotensin receptor blocker is reasonable to assess the response to treatment and progression of diabetic kidney disease. E|DIABETIC KIDNEY DISEASE|[rec181] ()
rec182|An ACE inhibitor or an angiotensin receptor blocker is not recommended for the primary prevention of diabetic kidney disease in patients with diabetes who have normal blood pressure, normal urinary albumin–to–creatinine ratio (<30 mg/g creatinine), and normal estimated glomerular filtration rate. B|DIABETIC KIDNEY DISEASE|[rec182] ()
rec183|When estimated glomerular filtration rate is <60 mL/min/1.73 m2, evaluate and manage potential complications of chronic kidney disease. E|DIABETIC KIDNEY DISEASE|[rec183] ()
rec184|Patients should be referred for evaluation for renal replacement treatment if they have an estimated glomerular filtration rate <30 mL/min/1.73 m2. A|DIABETIC KIDNEY DISEASE|[rec184] ()
rec185|Promptly refer to a physician experienced in the care of kidney disease for uncertainty about the etiology of kidney disease, difficult management issues, and rapidly progressing kidney disease. B|DIABETIC KIDNEY DISEASE|[rec185] ()
rec186|Optimize glycemic control to reduce the risk or slow the progression of diabetic retinopathy. A|DIABETIC RETINOPATHY|[rec186] ()
rec187|Optimize blood pressure and serum lipid control to reduce the risk or slow the progression of diabetic retinopathy. A|DIABETIC RETINOPATHY|[rec187] ()
rec188|Adults with type 1 diabetes should have an initial dilated and comprehensive eye examination by an ophthalmologist or optometrist within 5 years after the onset of diabetes. B|DIABETIC RETINOPATHY|[rec188] ()
rec189|Patients with type 2 diabetes should have an initial dilated and comprehensive eye examination by an ophthalmologist or optometrist at the time of the diabetes diagnosis. B|DIABETIC RETINOPATHY|[rec189] ()
rec190|If there is no evidence of retinopathy for one or more annual eye exams and glycemia is well controlled, then exams every 2 years may be considered. If any level of diabetic retinopathy is present, subsequent dilated retinal examinations should be repeated at least annually by an ophthalmologist or optometrist. If retinopathy is progressing or sight-threatening, then examinations will be required more frequently. B|DIABETIC RETINOPATHY|[rec190] ()
rec191|While retinal photography may serve as a screening tool for retinopathy, it is not a substitute for a comprehensive eye exam. E|DIABETIC RETINOPATHY|[rec191] ()
rec192|Women with preexisting type 1 or type 2 diabetes who are planning pregnancy or who are pregnant should be counseled on the risk of development and/or progression of diabetic retinopathy. B|DIABETIC RETINOPATHY|[rec192] ()
rec193|Eye examinations should occur before pregnancy or in the first trimester in patients with preexisting type 1 or type 2 diabetes, and then patients should be monitored every trimester and for 1 year postpartum as indicated by the degree of retinopathy. B|DIABETIC RETINOPATHY|[rec193] ()
rec194|Promptly refer patients with any level of macular edema, severe nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy (a precursor of proliferative diabetic retinopathy), or any proliferative diabetic retinopathy to an ophthalmologist who is knowledgeable and experienced in the management of diabetic retinopathy. A|DIABETIC RETINOPATHY|[rec194] ()
rec195|Laser photocoagulation therapy is indicated to reduce the risk of vision loss in patients with high-risk proliferative diabetic retinopathy and, in some cases, severe nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy. A|DIABETIC RETINOPATHY|[rec195] ()
rec196|Intravitreal injections of anti–vascular endothelial growth factor are indicated for central-involved diabetic macular edema, which occurs beneath the foveal center and may threaten reading vision. A|DIABETIC RETINOPATHY|[rec196] ()
rec197|The presence of retinopathy is not a contraindication to aspirin therapy for cardioprotection, as aspirin does not increase the risk of retinal hemorrhage. A|DIABETIC RETINOPATHY|[rec197] ()
rec198|All patients should be assessed for diabetic peripheral neuropathy starting at diagnosis of type 2 diabetes and 5 years after the diagnosis of type 1 diabetes and at least annually thereafter. B|NEUROPATHY|[rec198] ()
rec199|Assessment for distal symmetric polyneuropathy should include a careful history and assessment of either temperature or pinprick sensation (small-fiber function) and vibration sensation using a 128-Hz tuning fork (for large-fiber function). All patients should have annual 10-g monofilament testing to identify feet at risk for ulceration and amputation. B|NEUROPATHY|[rec199] ()
rec200|Symptoms and signs of autonomic neuropathy should be assessed in patients with microvascular and neuropathic complications. E|NEUROPATHY|[rec200] ()
rec201|Optimize glucose control to prevent or delay the development of neuropathy in patients with type 1 diabetes A and to slow the progression of neuropathy in patients with type 2 diabetes. B|NEUROPATHY|[rec201] ()
rec202|Assess and treat patients to reduce pain related to diabetic peripheral neuropathy B and symptoms of autonomic neuropathy and to improve quality of life. E|NEUROPATHY|[rec202] ()
rec203|Either pregabalin or duloxetine are recommended as initial pharmacologic treatments for neuropathic pain in diabetes. A|NEUROPATHY|[rec203] ()
rec204|Perform a comprehensive foot evaluation at least annually to identify risk factors for ulcers and amputations. B|FOOT CARE|[rec204] ()
rec205|All patients with diabetes should have their feet inspected at every visit. C|FOOT CARE|[rec205] ()
rec206|Obtain a prior history of ulceration, amputation, Charcot foot, angioplasty or vascular surgery, cigarette smoking, retinopathy, and renal disease and assess current symptoms of neuropathy (pain, burning, numbness) and vascular disease (leg fatigue, claudication). B|FOOT CARE|[rec206] ()
rec207|The examination should include inspection of the skin, assessment of foot deformities, neurological assessment (10-g monofilament testing with at least one other assessment: pinprick, temperature, vibration, or ankle reflexes), and vascular assessment including pulses in the legs and feet. B|FOOT CARE|[rec207] ()
rec208|Patients who are 50 years or older and any patients with symptoms of claudication or decreased and/or absent pedal pulses should be referred for further vascular assessment as appropriate. C|FOOT CARE|[rec208] ()
rec209|A multidisciplinary approach is recommended for individuals with foot ulcers and high-risk feet (e.g., dialysis patients and those with Charcot foot, prior ulcers, or amputation). B|FOOT CARE|[rec209] ()
rec210|Refer patients who smoke or who have histories of prior lower extremity complications, loss of protective sensation, structural abnormalities, or peripheral arterial disease to foot care specialists for ongoing preventive care and lifelong surveillance. C|FOOT CARE|[rec210] ()
rec211|Provide general preventive foot self-care education to all patients with diabetes. B|FOOT CARE|[rec211] ()
rec212|The use of specialized therapeutic footwear is recommended for high-risk patients with diabetes including those with severe neuropathy, foot deformities, or history of amputation. B|FOOT CARE|[rec212] ()
rec213|Consider the assessment of medical, mental, functional, and social geriatric domains in older adults to provide a framework to determine targets and therapeutic approaches for diabetes management. C|Older Adults|[rec213] ()
rec214|Screening for geriatric syndromes may be appropriate in older adults experiencing limitations in their basic and instrumental activities of daily living, as they may affect diabetes self-management and be related to health-related quality of life. C|Older Adults|[rec214] ()
rec215|Annual screening for early detection of mild cognitive impairment or dementia is indicated for adults 65 years of age or older. B|Older Adults|[rec215] ()
rec216|Older adults (≥65 years of age) with diabetes should be considered a high priority population for depression screening and treatment. B|Older Adults|[rec216] ()
rec217|Hypoglycemia should be avoided in older adults with diabetes. It should be assessed and managed by adjusting glycemic targets and pharmacologic interventions. B|Older Adults|[rec217] ()
rec218|Older adults who are cognitively and functionally intact and have significant life expectancy may receive diabetes care with goals similar to those developed for younger adults. C|Older Adults|[rec218] ()
rec219|Glycemic goals for some older adults might reasonably be relaxed using individual criteria, but hyperglycemia leading to symptoms or risk of acute hyperglycemic complications should be avoided in all patients. C|Older Adults|[rec219] ()
rec220|Screening for diabetes complications should be individualized in older adults. Particular attention should be paid to complications that would lead to functional impairment. C|Older Adults|[rec220] ()
rec221|Treatment of hypertension to individualized target levels is indicated in most older adults. C|Older Adults|[rec221] ()
rec222|Treatment of other cardiovascular risk factors should be individualized in older adults considering the time frame of benefit. Lipid-lowering therapy and aspirin therapy may benefit those with life expectancies at least equal to the time frame of primary prevention or secondary intervention trials. E|Older Adults|[rec222] ()
rec223|When palliative care is needed in older adults with diabetes, strict blood pressure control may not be necessary, and withdrawal of therapy may be appropriate. Similarly, the intensity of lipid management can be relaxed, and withdrawal of lipid-lowering therapy may be appropriate. E|Older Adults|[rec223] ()
rec224|Consider diabetes education for the staff of long-term care facilities to improve the management of older adults with diabetes. E|Older Adults|[rec224] ()
rec225|Patients with diabetes residing in long-term care facilities need careful assessment to establish glycemic goals and to make appropriate choices of glucose lowering agents based on their clinical and functional status. E|Older Adults|[rec225] ()
rec226|Overall comfort, prevention of distressing symptoms, and preservation of quality of life and dignity are primary goals for diabetes management at the end of life. E|Older Adults|[rec226] ()
rec227|Youth with type 1 diabetes and parents/caregivers (for patients aged <18 years) should receive culturally sensitive and developmentally appropriate individualized diabetes self-management education and support according to national standards at diagnosis and routinely thereafter. B|Diabetes Self-management Education and Support|[rec227] ()
rec228|At diagnosis and during routine follow-up care, assess psychosocial issues and family stresses that could impact adherence to diabetes management and provide appropriate referrals to trainedmental health professionals, preferably experienced in childhood diabetes. E|Psychosocial Issues|[rec228] ()
rec229|Mental health professionals should be considered integral members of the pediatric diabetes multidisciplinary team. E|Psychosocial Issues|[rec229] ()
rec230|Encourage developmentally appropriate family involvement in diabetes management tasks for children and adolescents, recognizing that premature transfer of diabetes care to the child can result in nonadherence and deterioration in glycemic control. B|Psychosocial Issues|[rec230] ()
rec231|Providers should assess children’s and adolescents’ diabetes distress, social adjustment (peer relationships), and school performance to determine whether further intervention is needed. B|Psychosocial Issues|[rec231] ()
rec232|In youth and families with behavioral self-care difficulties, repeated hospitalizations for diabetic ketoacidosis, or significant distress, consider referral to a mental health provider for evaluation and treatment. E|Psychosocial Issues|[rec232] ()
rec233|Adolescents should have time by themselves with their care provider(s) starting at age 12 years. E|Psychosocial Issues|[rec233] ()
rec234|Starting at puberty, preconception counseling should be incorporated into routine diabetes care for all girls of childbearing potential. A|Psychosocial Issues|[rec234] ()
rec235|An A1C goal of<7.5% (58mmol/mol) is recommended across all pediatric age-groups. E|Glycemic Control|[rec235] ()
rec236|Assess for the presence of autoimmune conditions associated with type 1 diabetes soon after the diagnosis and if symptoms develop. E|Autoimmune Conditions|[rec236] ()
rec237|Consider testing individuals with type 1 diabetes for antithyroid peroxidase and antithyroglobulin antibodies soon after the diagnosis. E|Thyroid Disease|[rec237] ()
rec238|Measure thyroid-stimulating hormone concentrations soon after the diagnosis of type 1 diabetes and after glucose control has been established. If normal, consider rechecking every 1–2 years or sooner if the patient develops symptoms suggestive of thyroid dysfunction, thyromegaly, an abnormal growth rate, or an unexplained glycemic variation. E|Thyroid Disease|[rec238] ()
rec239|Consider screening individuals with type 1 diabetes for celiac disease by measuring either tissue transglutaminase or deamidated gliadin antibodies, with documentation of normal total serum IgA levels, soon after the diagnosis of diabetes. E|Celiac Disease|[rec239] ()
rec240|Consider screening individuals who have a first-degree relative with celiac disease, growth failure, weight loss, failure to gain weight, diarrhea, flatulence, abdominal pain, or signs of malabsorption or in individuals with frequent unexplained hypoglycemia or deterioration in glycemic control. E|Celiac Disease|[rec240] ()
rec241|Individuals with biopsy-confirmed celiac disease should be placed on a gluten-free diet and have a consultation with a dietitian experienced in managing both diabetes and celiac disease. B|Celiac Disease|[rec241] ()
rec242|Blood pressure should be measured at each routine visit. Children found to have high-normal blood pressure (systolic blood pressure or diastolic blood pressure ≥90th percentile for age, sex, and height) or hypertension (systolic blood pressure or diastolic blood pressure ≥95th percentile for age, sex, and height) should have elevated blood pressure confirmed on 3 separate days. B|Hypertension|[rec242] ()
rec243|Initial treatment of high-normal blood pressure (systolic blood pressure or diastolic blood pressure consistently ≥90th percentile for age, sex, and height) includes dietary modification and increased exercise, if appropriate, aimed at weight control. If target blood pressure is not reached within 3–6 months of initiating lifestyle intervention, pharmacologic treatment should be considered. E|Hypertension|[rec243] ()
rec244|In addition to lifestyle modification, pharmacologic treatment of hypertension (systolic blood pressure or diastolic blood pressure consistently ≥95th percentile for age, sex, and height) should be considered as soon as hypertension is confirmed. E|Hypertension|[rec244] ()
rec245|ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers should be considered for the initial pharmacologic treatment of hypertension, following reproductive counseling and implementation of effective birth control due to the potential teratogenic effects of both drug classes. E|Hypertension|[rec245] ()
rec246|The goal of treatment is blood pressure consistently <90th percentile for age, sex, and height. E|Hypertension|[rec246] ()
rec247|Obtain a fasting lipid profile in children ≥10 years of age soon after the diagnosis (after glucose control has been established). E|Dyslipidemia|[rec247] ()
rec248|If lipids are abnormal, annual monitoring is reasonable. If LDL cholesterol values are within the accepted risk level (<100 mg/dL [2.6 mmol/L]), a lipid profile repeated every 3–5 years is reasonable. E|Dyslipidemia|[rec248] ()
rec249|Initial therapy should consist of optimizing glucose control and medical nutrition therapy using a Step 2 American Heart Association diet to decrease the amount of saturated fat in the diet. B|Dyslipidemia|[rec249] ()
rec250|After the age of 10 years, addition of a statin is suggested in patients who, despite medical nutrition therapy and lifestyle changes, continue to have LDL cholesterol >160 mg/dL (4.1 mmol/L) or LDL cholesterol >130 mg/dL (3.4 mmol/L) and one or more cardiovascular disease risk factors, following reproductive counseling and implementation of effective birth control due to the potential teratogenic effects of statins. E|Dyslipidemia|[rec250] ()
rec251|The goal of therapy is an LDL cholesterol value <100 mg/dL (2.6 mmol/L). E|Dyslipidemia|[rec251] ()
rec252|Elicit a smoking history at initial and follow-up diabetes visits. Discourage smoking in youth who do not smoke and encourage smoking cessation in those who do smoke. B|Smoking|[rec252] ()
rec253|Annual screening for albuminuria with a random spot urine sample for albumin-to-creatinine ratio should be considered once the child has had type 1 diabetes for 5 years. B|Nephropathy|[rec253] ()
rec254|Estimate glomerular filtration rate at initial evaluation and then based on age, diabetes duration, and treatment. E|Nephropathy|[rec254] ()
rec255|When persistently elevated urinary albumin-to-creatinine ratio (>30 mg/g) is documented with at least two of three urine samples, treatment with an ACE inhibitor should be considered and the dose titrated to maintain blood pressure within the age-appropriate normal range. The urine samples should be obtained over a 6-month interval following efforts to improve glycemic control and normalize blood pressure. C|Nephropathy|[rec255] ()
rec256|An initial dilated and comprehensive eye examination is recommended at age ≥10 years or after puberty has started, whichever is earlier, once the youth has had type 1 diabetes for 3–5 years. B|Retinopathy|[rec256] ()
rec257|After the initial examination, annual routine follow-up is generally recommended. Less frequent examinations, every 2 years, may be acceptable on the advice of an eye care professional. E|Retinopathy|[rec257] ()
rec258|Consider an annual comprehensive foot exam for the child at the start of puberty or at age ≥10 years, whichever is earlier, once the youth has had type 1 diabetes for 5 years. E|Neuropathy|[rec258] ()
rec259|Health care providers and families should begin to prepare youth with diabetes in early to midadolescence and, at the latest, at least 1 year before the transition to adult health care. E|TRANSITION FROM PEDIATRIC TO ADULT CARE|[rec259] ()
rec260|Both pediatricians and adult health care providers should assist in providing support and links to resources for the teen and emerging adult. B|TRANSITION FROM PEDIATRIC TO ADULT CARE|[rec260] ()
rec261|Starting at puberty, preconception counseling should be incorporated into routine diabetes care for all girls of childbearing potential. A|Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy|[rec261] ()
rec262|Family planning should be discussed and effective contraception should be prescribed and used until a woman is prepared and ready to become pregnant. A|Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy|[rec262] ()
rec263|Preconception counseling should address the importance of glycemic control as close to normal as is safely possible, ideally A1C <6.5% (48 mmol/mol), to reduce the risk of congenital anomalies. B|Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy|[rec263] ()
rec264|Women with preexisting type 1 or type 2 diabetes who are planning pregnancy or who have become pregnant should be counseled on the risk of development and/or progression of diabetic retinopathy. Dilated eye examinations should occur before pregnancy or in the first trimester, and then patients should be monitored every trimester and for 1 year postpartum as indicated by degree of retinopathy and as recommended by the eye care provider. B|Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy|[rec264] ()
rec265|Lifestyle change is an essential component of management of gestational diabetes mellitus and may suffice for the treatment for many women. Medications should be added if needed to achieve glycemic targets. A|Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy|[rec265] ()
rec266|Insulin is the preferred medication for treating hyperglycemia in gestational diabetes mellitus, as it does not cross the placenta to a measurable extent. Metformin and glyburide may be used, but both cross the placenta to the fetus, with metformin likely crossing to a greater extent than glyburide. All oral agents lack long-term safety data. A|Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy|[rec266] ()
rec267|Metformin, when used to treat polycystic ovary syndrome and induce ovulation, need not be continued once pregnancy has been confirmed. A|Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy|[rec267] ()
rec268|Potentially teratogenic medications (ACE inhibitors, statins, etc.) should be avoided in sexually active women of childbearing age who are not using reliable contraception. B|Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy|[rec268] ()
rec269|Fasting and postprandial self-monitoring of blood glucose are recommended in both gestational diabetes mellitus and preexisting diabetes in pregnancy to achieve glycemic control. Some women with preexisting diabetes should also test blood glucose preprandially. B|Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy|[rec269] ()
rec270|Due to increased red blood cell turnover, A1C is lower in normal pregnancy than in normal nonpregnant women. The A1C target in pregnancy is 6–6.5% (42–48 mmol/mol); <6% (42 mmol/mol) may be optimal if this can be achieved without significant hypoglycemia, but the target may be relaxed to <7% (53 mmol/mol) if necessary to prevent hypoglycemia. B|Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy|[rec270] ()
rec271|In pregnant patients with diabetes and chronic hypertension, blood pressure targets of 120–160/80–105 mmHg are suggested in the interest of optimizing long-term maternal health and minimizing impaired fetal growth. E|Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy|[rec271] ()
rec272|Perform an A1C for all patients with diabetes or hyperglycemia admitted to the hospital if not performed in the prior 3 months. B|Diabetes Care in the Hospital|[rec272] ()
rec273|Insulin therapy should be initiated for treatment of persistent hyperglycemia starting at a threshold ≥180 mg/dL (10.0 mmol/L). Once insulin therapy is started, a target glucose range of 140–180 mg/dL (7.8–10.0 mmol/L) is recommended for the majority of critically ill patients A and noncritically ill patients. C|Diabetes Care in the Hospital|[rec273] ()
rec274|More stringent goals, such as <140 mg/dL (<7.8 mmol/L), may be appropriate for selected patients, as long as this can be achieved without significant hypoglycemia. C|Diabetes Care in the Hospital|[rec274] ()
rec275|Intravenous insulin infusions should be administered using validated written or computerized protocols that allow for predefined adjustments in the insulin infusion rate based on glycemic fluctuations and insulin dose. E|Diabetes Care in the Hospital|[rec275] ()
rec276|Basal insulin or a basal plus bolus correction insulin regimen is the preferred treatment for noncritically ill patients with poor oral intake or those who are taking nothing by mouth. An insulin regimen with basal, nutritional, and correction components is the preferred treatment for noncritically ill hospitalized patients with good nutritional intake. A|Diabetes Care in the Hospital|[rec276] ()
rec277|Sole use of sliding scale insulin in the inpatient hospital setting is strongly discouraged. A|Diabetes Care in the Hospital|[rec277] ()
rec278|A hypoglycemia management protocol should be adopted and implemented by each hospital or hospital system. A plan for preventing and treating hypoglycemia should be established for each patient. Episodes of hypoglycemia in the hospital should be documented in the medical record and tracked. E|Diabetes Care in the Hospital|[rec278] ()
rec279|The treatment regimen should be reviewed and changed as necessary to prevent further hypoglycemia when a blood glucose value is <70 mg/dL (3.9 mmol/L). C|Diabetes Care in the Hospital|[rec279] ()
rec280|There should be a structured discharge plan tailored to the individual patient with diabetes. B|Diabetes Care in the Hospital|[rec280] ()
